[1] I visualize two paths my life might take. The one where I have a child and the one where I do not. I try to place them on equal footing, imagining each as something I truly want. Though I know both will be filled with disappointment and loss.

[2] To push away disappointment, I prepare for the "worst". It's not exactly superstition. I just don't want to be surprised by my sadness. I want to see it plain.

[3] A mood sweeps in like a fog. I no longer know where it came from. I get stuck in circles. I try to ignore the suspense; anger and hurt can do that, but not entirely. Suspense is lodged within me, someplace deep. The fog crawls at my feet. "Let me stay," it mews, and though I definitely want it to leave, it doesn't feel entirely up to me.

[4] I pause to look carefully at the book cover. I am obsessed with the way books feel. Their aspect ratio, the texture of the paper. If I put my nose close, I can see the dot matrix of the printed artwork. It's not grey; it's white with a multitude of black dots.

[6] I seem to be obsessed with the worst outcome.

[7] Yesterday: blood. So.

[8] I try to avoid catastrophic thinking.

[9] Rain mixed with sleet mixed with snow. Described as "not great weather". Described as "the snow storm was a bust". Described as "garbage". Described as "lucky" because the flight wasn't delayed. Described as "looking through the glass and watching for the trickles of water that disturb the drops and leave momentary trails of emptiness amidst the concave baubles of lights and reflection". Described as "beautiful".

[10] I am in love with my best friend. It's a strange feeling, a bit like unrequited love, a kind of heaviness to it, a finality. I want to appreciate this feeling not as anticipation but as living through the everyday weathers of my humanity. I fall in love. I want things I do not get to have.

[11] I am mid-cycle, but trying to forget it. S\_\_\_ and I have a long conversation while we run along the river, crossing one bridge and then another, putting miles down into our shoes. The air is frigid and the trees so bare it's embarrassing. The city feels run down, but I know that summer will enliven it. Still, it's sad to see the landscape so starkly.

[12] I start feeling nauseated around noon. It is strangely early for sicknesses, but I also know of distributions and long tails and the queerness of statistics. The nausea builds. At 4pm I vomit in the hallway at work. Three explosions of watery internals. I make it home and vomit more. I take up my position on the couch and stay there for 24 hours. S\_\_\_ commiserates and brings me crackers and tea but there is nothing he can do. Then, in the morning, it's gone, replaced with lethargy and languor.

[13] For long stretches of time I accept having to wait for the winds of chance to determine my fate. I feel unrushed. But then it descends on me: the panic of uncertainty, the fear of words like "never." I try to avoid catastrophic thinking, but how to avoid my most central tendencies? Perhaps avoidance is the wrong way to view my worries. You don't break habits, you replace them. But I fear replacing worry with hope.

[15] I can feel my brain discovering its own anxiety. Like, perhaps I am just feeling sad, and the object of the sadness would be something else if I didn't have this particular anxiety in mind. I can feel the lightening. My perspective on reality shifts like a long pan in a movie: here I am from the left, but now here I see myself face on, then from the right, aspects hidden and revealed, the lighting changing my silhouette. I am no more one thing than the sea, who must change face on a dime, whose edges team with only the most robust kinds of life. I must be robust to my tides. I must remember my changing.

[16] I do have this strange avoidance of looking forward to things that may not happen. I don't want to be disappointed; the best way to do this seems to never be too sure. Yet I enjoy fantasizing about the future. But it must be distant enough to never be confused with hope.

[17] We get our dog neutered. He comes home whimpering in the back of the car, then struggles to lie down in the bedroom, his back leg twitching, his head drooping. With the cone he is unable to push his head into my stomach, like he normally does in the morning when he has just woken up. Instead he stands sadly still, tail down. Eventually, he curls up the best he can. We take turns laying down next to him while he sleeps in fits. We were not sure that we should neuter him, but we decided to do it. Reasons, reasons. Fertility is not his future.

[18] Secretly I wonder if his loss of fertility will coincide with my gain. I am days away from the middle of my cycle, but I know that I'm playing a game of chance. This cycle I am using test strips, capturing a tablespoon of urine each afternoon and watching it draw purple lines on thin slips of paper. So far, the correct hormone surge has eluded me, but the time is not quite right yet.

[19] I am sorry I do not evoke Kirkegaard and some literary lineage of worry; instead I invite Gauss and his ideas about the "normal" distribution, and standard deviations, and medians. I know that "not today" does not mean never. Still I am hypersensitive to the present, when for once it might help to look ahead.

[20] No, that's a lie. It's my fear of what's ahead that plagues me. S\_\_\_ and I sit on the floor and I try to diagram out my anxiety. He makes a comment about probability and I tell him he's wrong, I explain that my chances each month are the same, the prior knowledge does not, in fact, change anything. Priors---a technical term in Bayesian statistics---legitimize the hope that the past can tell us something about the future. In this case, I suggest that every unsuccessful month may, in fact, indicate a more doubtful future. I haven't seen this modeled in any scientific paper I've found, but to me the math makes sense. Every month that does not succeed means your chances of never succeeding are just a little bit higher, because a long string of bad months are a prior for never finding success. But I know that I must simply wait for the tide to come in, and go out, and just sit at the edge of the sea for as long as it takes.

[21] I don't know much Kirkegaard, but I can give you some poetry. In Derek Walcott's "Love After Love," he implores me to love myself: "You will love again the stranger who was your self." What stranger I have become, so worried at the edge of the sea.

[22] My dog recovers from the anaesthetic fast, but still must wear his cone of shame. He no longer recognizes himself in the mirror, shocked and angered by the dog with the suspicious head. His hearing is disturbed and the cone knocks on trees and doors and legs.

[24] We learn that our dog can still lick his wound even with the cone. He nudges the cone up his neck and holds it there with his knee. Then, with his ever-flexible neck, he can reach beyond the edge of the cone to his genitals. What is the point of this cone?

[25] When we finally take off the cone after ten days, we learn its purpose. Cone-free, our dog runs around with play and joy and too much zest for the recommended recovery. The cone subdued him.

[28] The ocean mops out and then back in. The surface breaks and cracks, fault lines of white foam netted out to the curve of the margin pushing up the sand towards me. Sometimes the surface smooths out, organ meat shiny and slick, and then it roughens, carves bulbous white bubbles. I am a very old fish and now inside creating a very new one.

[29] It does not feel like there is anything inside me that is alive; no more alive than the rest of me, my lungs and heart and liver all living within. I am up all night vomiting and remember that
to vomit uncontrollably is to be possessed by something within: strong bodily action I did not take yet moves me. I am not shocked at the thought of exorcism; food poisoning is not so different. Still my belly does not feel like it houses a human. S\_\_\_ agrees, says it houses human potential. The anxiety is that to conceive of anything means giving up control. I am waiting for something to move within me that I recognize.

[31] To conceive of such a large mass as to forget about the edges, like the octopus with its distributed brain, each limb trusting that some other mind will coordinate the actions. I want to have one hand forget the other. I want to be the limb and not the coordinator. Each poem sits like a grain of sand; the ocean decides which far flung beach to send it.

[32] I give up. I push it out like a child. The words come out bloody but breathing. I have conceived of nothing. I worried that I would not get pregnant. My cycles came short and quick and I bled lightly and I worried in what felt like without end as if some kind of end would release me. But anxiety tends to beget more of itself, a jellyfish that stutters back into its own larval state, or a tree released from life into its own seeds, or perhaps the mitochondria that sing their own song and create themselves anew, and so worry tends to give birth to more anxiety and as my cycles ended and I finally conceived of something I got to worry about new futures, like losing that which I had just imagined, or creating something I could not love. I guess I am trying to convince you that the anxiety of conception is never ending, a stream with no estuary, just continuously winding through the dirty rocks and the dance of animals around it.

[33] Conception being also the way we see the world. I conceive of a reader; you conceive of an author. We birth each other then, creating new creatures to hold up the edifice of communication. Athena, born of Zeus's head, was arguably his first true conception, a way of seeing that came from his imbibement of Metis and then birthed a new god. To swallow
someone so wholly their mind lives on in your own.

[34] My back has begun to hurt, the first sign that my body is rebelling against its changing form, or rather that conception is requiring new ways of being and I have not changed enough to match the change within me. Pain being mostly perception, being a kind of conception: we create pain when we expect it and can wish it away if we do not believe it is there. Which is not to say it is not real, only that its boundaries are porous and sticky.

[35] The strange shifting motions within me could be anything. Gas, organ movement, whatever it is that creates the flutter of wings in moments of fear or joy or the soft space in between (which S\_\_\_ says can be manipulated, i.e. one can change anxiety into excitement simply in the mind) but there is the obvious interpretation that the thing within me is beginning to move in ways apparent to me. When asked, "Do you feel it moving yet?" the answer is always sloughed off into another question about what it means to know when something you are waiting for has truly arrived.

[36] My placenta is bilobed, two pancakes separated by a small cord, two matching organs which should have been one. I am twice here. Once, watching the bird posed for flight, its head waiting for the sky to reach down. Once, pulsing blood throughout tiny tubes inside me, poised to fill some other creature with life. In the ultrasound it is clear: the even grey blobs are close but do not touch. The baby's head a mere distraction. But out here in the world the knowing is different. I know that something shifts within me. I know that my surface is thick and changing. I know that at some point separation will occur. I know that so much is happening without me.

[37] Some of the color moves down the trees in waves, the top a shocking red while the bottom remains a grassy green. But others come mottled, the red and green splotched together like watercolor paints, each leaf a small canvas of merging. Sometimes a leaf changes all on its own, no concern for its jungled neighbors who haven't heard the call. A single leaf, or two, or ten, responding to some touch of air I cannot see or hear or smell. The air feels lighter now, the weight of summer lifting and leaving behind this vacant feeling, and the plants know something I don't, something about how to shed their skin and prepare.

[38] It is like a huge heartbeat in my gut, a single beat that comes at random times. Like a shift of food or bowels. Like an escape artist. Like a bulge. Like a bubbling. Like a leaf of the road that lifts and shifts just a foot away. Like the saccades of the women reading next to me. Something shifts but not like the waves of the sea, which cover the sand lightly, more like the white crest that doesn't ever crash, gets subsumed back into the blue of the wave. Not like the smooth turns of a bike wheel. Not like the branches thrumming in the air currents. Not like the clouds which crawl across the sky. Not like that at all.

[39] I keep forgetting. People talk to me and I am fully there, all mind, no body. There is no body within me. Human drama curls around my consciousness. I am pure empath. All talk. But the leaves become so red outside. Deep and pulsing, beating against the yellow and orange, cresting against the blue of the sky. The color sings and then, the shadow lifts. I am again a mass of blood and flesh. Creator of worlds.

[40] I am no single thing, though the words remain static and harshly angular, resisting my change. Clarice Lispector attempts to pin down the present moment, aches against her inability to convert the now and the this and the here into black-blue ink, to turn her thoughts into scratches that can inhabit my mind. She strives against herself, against me as her reader, she strives into her failing. But reading her again I am less sure. Maybe she writes like me, simply about the inability to cast any one thing into stone. These words shift beneath me, or rather, I am unsteady on them.

[44] The letters that turn shape into meaning are absurd: there is no reason this should work. The fireflies should be gone by now. This tree should not be able to grow here. It is extremely unlikely that my grandparents survived the war, this is true, but they did and never told anyone how.

[45] I have crafted light out of glass. Source out of subject. Heat comes both from the center of the earth and from outside of its bounds. I am talking about stars, about the gaseous gurgling of newness. That it comes from both sides. That what is within me also comes from without. The muse and also the inner voice. The words and also their reader.

[46] Already I project what this may become, how it may be received, as if before anything has existed it already lives a whole life as conjecture. I imagine you as enraptured or perhaps disappointed. I imagine myself as content or perhaps disturbed. It is hard to imagine a child, though, as I have no vision for this creative act, only that the process attracts me. Perhaps this is a better way to write: without goal, only an interest in the way the words might come out, ready to be surprised.

[47] How many ways can I describe the ocean? The tulled hook of white that must grab onto the wave and create more space for itself. The too-shiny lull in its surface that reflects the addled sky. The pockmarked sand losing sight of the tide.

[48] Language that turns to habit. I know that poetry should be "fresh" but what if I want my poetry to be well-loved and worn. What if it should feel familiar to me, a sweater I wear on my worst days. What if I want to do it wrong.

[49] I think I may abandon a friend. Can leaving be a form of creation? Leaving is not destruction, but it does create a gap, like when the space through which I just pass becomes freshly empty of me. When I leave this part of my life, when I enter into the other side, the hole of what I just was closes in around itself, a grand hug, but perhaps the lesson is that I can never be there again, it is impossible to look back, I can never know about this new creature, everything I create I must be blind to.

[50] Which is to say, something suggested you spend time with these words. And the space between the words and your gaze is a scary one, because once it is closed there is no going back. You've touched this sentence and now we are bound, even if that binding has been created purely such that you can sever it.

[52] I must create myself anew. For one audience, I make my shadow round and smooth, the slow shapes of hills and moon. For another, I stretch out my fingers, bend at the elbow, and shift into the jagged surface of craters. I contort and twist. Each shape aims to appease a certain crowd, but I am blinded. The light becomes chromatic around me, long shafts of yellow that putter with dust. It is wrong to say the shadow distorts or obscures. I am what I create. I am allowed to change myself.

[53] I am taking pictures of the leaves all the time, even though I see them every year, even though the red is just as crisp and contained as it always is, even though the way a single leaf can fade from green into yellow is repeated over and over and over, I still want to put those colors and shapes into some new form. The obsession is with capture, because it turns my sight into something else entirely, just like these words are turning the creature inside me (say it: the baby, the person) into something new.

[54] I planted my peppers late, and somehow wrong. They didn't grow as they did last year; the soil was too dense or too cold, the light insufficient, the seeds were old, the pots too wet or maybe too dry. By the time I realize they've stunted it is too late to grow again, the season moves swiftly, plants take time, I am no expert, instead I am messing around with these vegetables, forgetting them, losing my records, and they're small. All season they are small. The arc of the year makes for slow learning. I keep meaning to get better at this but the days drift into me before I notice their weight.

[56] Perhaps the words are not yet ready to be birthed. The metaphor is nice: the poem comes premature, or overdue. The poem creates a difficult labor, or comes unexpectedly quick. The poem is in breech, or its chin won't tuck. My mother had seven children; she knew how to bring something into the world. What if I only write one poem in my entire life? What if I could not practice? Instead, I wash dishes for decades, watching the soap slick over my favorite mug, experimenting with sponges and scrub brushes and different temperatures of water. At the end, the poem comes out, and it is long but finite, and all I get to do is watch it grow.

[57] I remember reading Anne Lamott talking about the day her book is released. You expect something to happen, she writes, but very little does. That moment when the book turns into something that anyone can read, that moment you think it becomes real, is a small wave that lulls onto the shore and then retracts, leaving the bubbling of air from the ghost crabs. This is not what I've been told of birthing a human. Instead, the moment when a child goes from something within you to something without is, I am told, momentous. Still, I suspect that mostly we are made by the soft waves.

[58] I build the poem one word at a time. They come at random intervals, edging the poem into existence. I am interested in how words commune with each other, the way they bridge across the white space, ask questions of each other. Emily Dickinson didn't want to publish some of her poems, not wanting to create a canon, unwilling to part with her uncertainty. Was it anxiety? Or some higher theory, a belief that poetry lives in our potential to be more than one thing at once.

[61] Sometimes I think there is a bird inside me, flexing and testing its wings. Settling down into a nest, perhaps, or waking up and stretching its limbs. The jaggedness of it, the suddenness. The boniness. I read a book of short stories in which each character is pregnant with animal: sheep, horse, bird, raccoon. Jellyfish. Dragon. Sometimes the pregnancy is literal, other times it exists between reality and metaphor. What does it mean to conceive of something new? The book I think is really about longing. Or maybe it is about the strangeness of creation, the way it can push against you.

[64] My friend builds little tools for poetry. Programs to shift the words around, websites that merge words or create new ones. She says the tools are in service of her writing, but can also replace the act of writing: the process becomes the product, the new way of creating subsumes whatever is created.

[65] I keep a hold of myself. The sadness ekes in after stress, and after that comes the fatigue, or is it just the act of creation that slows me, makes me lie in the sun with my dog and let the light bungle its ways across my eyelids.

[66] Lyn Hejinian dislikes the epiphanic poem. The poems that lead you to a specific revelation. The theory is that this mode is closed, shutting down the possibilities of language rather than freeing the reader from guided thought. For a long time I wanted to write the perfect epiphanic poem because of its intense beauty and also the way it feels clean and right and so hard; it really felt like I had to have the epiphany with the poem, that I had to sneak up on the ideas that lurked beneath my own language. Hejinian was the first person to suggest I needn't perfect the form, and that instead I could walk through the forest of words and stop someone entirely of my own choosing, at some perfectly and epiphanically random tree, and let you decide where to go next.

[69] The patterns waft and unravel like an optical illusion. I try to refuse the stress of my job and instead enjoy this thing within me, which I will only have for so long. The keys click softly but in an organic pattern, telling me something about language and how it emerges from our hands. The stress is mostly about fear, or really uncertainty, and I want to believe that I can hold uncertainty with care.

[70] I want to labor this child out of me. A perverse desire to suffer just like all the people before me. I just want to know what it's like, even if I expect to not like it, or perhaps I want to prove that I am strong in some way that I doubt, or maybe I just sadistic, or maybe I want to labor everything out of me, refuse anything that could mollify the pain of creation. I am worried but not too worried because above the worry is curiosity and if only everything that caused me pain could also evoke wonder.

[71] I read a book narrated by a mountain lion. He overhears hikers from L.A. discussing their love life, and traffic, and a scarcity mentality, and how all these people are moving from New York. The lion is like a child, beholding the adult world but not understanding it. The lion says “ellay” instead of “L.A.” The lion says “scare city” instead of “scarcity.” The lion doesn't understand the human world but also doesn't feel bad about this. The lion wonders but he does not worry.

[73] I stare at the leaves, which skirt the tree and look up at those yet to fall. The backside of each leaf being a pale reflection. Colors are muted but still it is their range, the set of hues in infinite arrangement, the palette that comes back every year. The leaves are half-fallen. The season is half-here. I am halfway through a journey which is just a beginning.

[74] I search for one good sentence.

[75] Labor interests me because it reads like a moment where the body takes over and the mind must learn to cope. Creation becomes an involuntary act.

[76] The analogy is poor. Who has died giving birth to their novel? What about obstetric violence, or the twilight sleep? To be unconscious throughout your creation. A drug which erases my memory but creates a book. I feel compelled to write to you, but does it kick inside me? Could it kill me? Does it have to come out no matter what?

[77] I would like to spend all day waiting for him to kick. To lull when he lulls and attend when he is attentive. What would it mean to have nothing but creation? To steep myself in the way words can come from letters can come from movements of the fingers and the tendons of the hand. I would like to feel him being created inside me, just as I want to wait and watch and wait for the words, which might also come in regular intervals, which might also reveal a rhythm.

[78] Today I am not worried. The kicks come strong even though I am busy at work and distracted. I am starting to trust that he is there. I am starting to trust.

[79] In high school I considered giving up my first name; I wanted to take on my middle name (my grandmother's) which I had learned to love. But I couldn't part with my moniker. We had fused. That which was given to me had become me. A temporary cast become exoskeleton. I, who did not create myself and did not name me, am an agglomeration of pieces that others assembled. Just as I will assemble these pieces for another.

[80] The Nature Book assembles sentences about nature from other novels. Comitta's effect here is wavelike and rhythmic, as descriptions of grass and horse and moon rustle through me. Writing like a child stacking blocks. I will assemble this book algorithmically, and let some choices fall to the computer, in the hope that by placing this responsibility outside of myself I will create something more true. As if my own hand in the matter would bind me.

[83] How will you imprint into these words? If every copy is different, then you hold some keystone of the arch, and you needn't know your neighbors but they exist, each imparting an idea of what this is into the heaviness of the intertextual ether. Taken together, all copies of the book file into a larger rhythm, but no one will read all copies. Mostly you will dip into this pool, and if you're lucky see the ripples intersect from afar.

[85] In The Vegetarian a woman turns into a plant. Or rather, she believes this: in the book, she ends up in a psychiatric hospital, refusing food because all she needs is light and water. There is another version of the story, in a short story also by Han Kang, in which the woman really does turn into a plant, and her husband sets her outside on their porch, and eats the fruit that she blooms in the spring. I am starting to recognize I am not just one person. The kicks get stronger and come when people said they would: when I lay down, or after I eat. They come when I am in a work meeting, when I feel like a single person. My transformation is on the horizon, the moment before even dawn comes, the moment when the light shifts and I think, Sure, yes, maybe if I put my hands flat on the earth at some point my fingers would turn into roots.

[88] Although the sun rises, the rain comes harder and the clouds make dawn come evenly, that staticky grey of a cyberpunk horizon. The leaves are almost gone, just the occasional tree holding on to one last red or yellow thought. The rain will take down most of the remaining leaves, and we'll enter the period of waiting for spring. Already the magnolia tree outside my window has its buds and I don't know if this is normal or due to the strange warmth we get periodically as winter steps in to take the place of autumn.

[89] There is a way in which I had hoped my life could come together before I had a child, like a cleanly wrapped present where the paper is just the right size and the folds are neat and tight. My mother warned me against this---the time is never right, she said---although I have seen it in others, who have done that thing where they marry and buy a house and have high-paying jobs and a room for a nursery. I have never wanted this, but I have wanted the stability of it, that false feeling of control, a way of putting bounds on my life that could make me feel safe. The alternative is a little looser, something beyond knowing, a trust or just hope that the path before me keeps going even though my ability to see far beyond my next steps becomes its own kind of box.

[90] When I first started to collage, in the depths of a depression, what I loved was the surprise. The pieces that I put together because their color or shape or texture felt right would eventually bind into a whole. There was a magic in it, that I could refrain from any hope or direction and instead focus on the feeling of putting one foot in front of the other. But as soon as it worked out a few times, I started to get nervous. Could I make a mistake?

[92] I suppose I should mention the ocean, that old god of creation, who birthed all the life I've ever known. This child within me swims in a primordial soup, perhaps blue-green like the early algae which fed oxygen to the sky and suggested that cells might be an interesting way to create. I am excited to return to the beach, where my whale belly can be lifted by the buoyancy of the sea.

[93] Talking about birth makes the tears reach up and out and into that cavity behind my eyes. I don't cry but the pressure is there, that heavy haze of emotion, the weight of it, that load that makes me speak carefully because words have always been a vessel for tears. A coworker asked me about my emotions---"This is something I worry about,” she said, “that it would affect my work,” and I tell her with a laugh that mostly it is music that makes me want to cry, that the Beatles have become so heart-wrenching, but other than that I'm steady in the wind. I don't tell her that it is her question, its tender touch at the idea that the thing growing inside is changing me, that makes the mist cradle my face, that makes me blink away this fog, this creep of overwhelm, that it's all so much, that everything is just so much right now.

[94] “What will you do about gender?” she asks, and it's a good question. What will I do about gender. Every time I tell someone the sex of this child they say something strange. Lucky, boys are closer to their mothers than girls are. Oh, girls are much easier to raise. I keep calling this thing I am creating “it” because it does not yet feel human. I don't want to deny the humanity of what's within me, but I am not ready to acknowledge it as more than alive.

[95] I cannot quite conceive of having a child. I have shifty images in my mind of holding an infant, but they are worse than the dredges of a dream, they don't even have that strange logic behind them. They are flat. I am holding an infant. But what. What do I feel. What motion happens behind the stillness.

[96] I was so worried I would not conceive. The thought wrecked me and I cried and cried. Every spot of blood was a sign that I would bleed again forever, that I could not create, that I would not. Today I talk to a book agent, and he is kind, and I do not even have a proposal, he is used to working with academics, and I keep asking, “What are you getting out of this?” and he keeps smiling and saying he is looking to build relationships and help people navigate this opaque and difficult world. I know that I will write a book and I know that right now that book is not within me.

[97] I feel I am getting huge. I ask my friend who is a bodybuilder about stretch marks. I tell him I am embarrassed, because it feels so vain to worry about leaving marks on my body, as if this could happen and there might be no trace. We talk about collagen, and diet, and microneedling. The way that scars can heal. Oxymoronic. I have stretch marks on my back from growing too fast; my brother has ones to match. The marks became their own object, their own kind of creation.

[98] I try to notice when the sun aches through the clouds. It aches so hard the colors become buoyant and hopeful despite the cold. I remember my first spring in America, the way the flowers thrust and blushed into being. It was shocking, no one had planted them, they just erupted, the earth was ready. It was so different from where I grew up. There it never got cold and there was no fall, nothing ever fell, and that meant nothing needed to reanimate.

[102] \1907. "While throughout the lower grades of intelligence, concrete objects and acts are reproduced in thought, and the imagination is thus almost exclusively reminiscent, the further development of the power of conception implies a continually wider range of thoughts, more numerous and more varied and involved." Interstate Medical Journal November 906. Accessed via the Oxford English Dictionary.

[103] \1650. "All evidence is conception..and all conception is imagination, and proceedeth from Sense." T. Hobbes, Humane Nature xi. 136. Accessed via the Oxford English Dictionary.

[105] Maybe everything I'm looking for is staying very still. When I pause I want to stay that way. Opposite of the puppy who will spin and spin in excitement and in the patches of stillness seems only to recoil and get ready to set himself back in motion. Am I a spring also? Vibrating with what could occur.

[106] I've started to walk everywhere. Time moves more slowly, which is what I want, a kind of dilation of life, the absence of hurry. Walking sets the city into motion, and I get sight of its limbs and joints, its angles and curves. I walk in the morning when I can look at the sky as often as I like and watch the clouds and feel the sun even though it is cold. I walk in the evening when I mostly stare at the dark shapes of shadows on the concrete, and look out for potholes and the gravel of construction.

[108] S\_\_\_ drives through Arizona, almost in L.A. He sends me a picture of the desert, the flat bleached grass with a skinny band of sand slithering through its endlessness. In the distance, muted mesas, and above that the rich sapphire of sky, sparsed with white tendrils of clouds. Here in Boston the sky grows grey and the trees are mostly empty, just a few dry leaves waiting to mark the end of fall.

[109] Rachel Carson, before she wrote Silent Spring, wrote about the ocean. The way life is buried in its mineral mix. The way it tossed life up onto the barren land, shoving plants onto the rocks. She never bows and calls the ocean a mother, but she nods at it as the source of all life.

[111] I want to slow down. I want to put one foot in front of the other. I want to feel my fingers at the keyboard and notice every key, the way it compresses down to its click. Sometimes when I sit down I just want to stay. The blood is moving through my veins. Come on, that has to be enough. The baby gets restless, kicks low in my pelvis and then, later, up by my belly button, above it even. Is that even possible? It's enough just to see the cream colored paint on the walls, just to hear the dog chewing on its bone, just to feel the tiny current of air over my knuckles. One foot presses lightly against the other. My head is being held up by my neck. My neck muscles must be so strong. I must be so strong to stay here and just stop and let it all be.

[112] Occasionally I feel out of breath. I'm lying down, or sitting, and I pull in the air through my nose as hard as I can. I need something more from the air than it wants to give.

[113] I am on the verge of tears. The edge of crying. I look over the precipice and it is no good out there. I'd like to stay here, where the emotions live behind the eyes, where I'm still able to walk to work and make myself dinner. I am overflowing. With what? With a lack of breath, with a fear of the future, with a desire to stay home, with a hope that the people close to me can hold me right, with a weight that bears down so hard on my ankles they swell at the elastic of my socks.

[114] I have this feeling that this moment won't come back. I want to live in this state of pregnancy as best I can, in case, after I leave it, it turns out I will never return. Pregnancy is hard but demands little of me. Writing is not scarce in this way, but perhaps the scarcity would help me live in it.

[115] I hear it first. The rain comes down harder, and then harder still. I step out to the living room to see it and then, ignoring the conversation, outside onto the porch, where only a touch of water is blown into me. One step forward and I'm in the torrent. We're just past dusk and the sky retains a last hope of light. It is not just clouds above; the light peaks through; strange, right? The pummel of rain tempts me. I see myself stepping into it. I imagine my clothing wetted down to a clingy mat around me. I feel the chill of the wind against wet arms. I envision my siblings noticing and then commenting on my act. But I don't do it fast enough. The rain starts to slow, and then slow more. My moment has passed. No creation has occurred.

[117] Still, the creature growing inside me swizzles and swirls and knocks around like he is the first thing to ever grow. There is a line from Portrait of a Lady on Fire where she says, “Do all lovers feel like they are the first to invent love's gestures?” Maybe I'm remembering the line wrong; it doesn't matter. Every act of conception feels like the first one. Clarice Lispector wanted to describe the now-instant; I am trying to tell you about the moment when something becomes.

[119] When I return home I open my desk drawer and see my colored markers and collage scraps and phrases I don't remember cutting out from magazines: "rain in the," "layer upon layer," "alternating oscillations," "bows," "Hungarian-American," "the blueness of the sky," "storm, though near, is..." I almost cry at the thought of collaging and remind myself to give away my paints which I haven't used for years and many of which may have dried up. Yes, crying is easier now. It swells and spins and softens.

[121] It is stupid how amazing the ocean is. Swimming in water so salty you float. The lifting of weight. The shifting of tide. That great mosaic of white foam as the water reaches and slips over the sand or onto rocks. I love that pattern to death, have hundreds of photos of it, could stare at it for hours, the intricacy of it, its clarity, its constant motion. Ever shifting it remains recognizable everywhere I see it. I want my writing to be like that: not one thing, but a recognizable same, something you could look at again and again and keep seeing that sameness anew.

[122] I tempt myself all day with sleep, even with the winter sun sighing in through the window. My body is stuck in an old timezone. Once I was told that my poetry manuscript needed more unique words: nap, siesta, doze, snooze, shut-eye, silence, home, sea, solitude, night eventually comes, early and dark, and I make lentils and miss my dog. I curl into a routine, even as I throw my most comfortable words into the bin and search for new ones. Words that haven't been leached of meaning; words that shudder and shine.

[125] I try to live in Lispector's now-instant, whose mucused birth slips into departure too quickly. I am awake in the night. My breathing slows and then speeds. I conceive of the moment and it swims out of my grasp. I become fish and the moments slick by, I cannot stop moving. I am here and here and here. Fish become mammal become fish again. Whales and dolphins taking great gasps of air and then holding their breath as if they could still breathe water. I can no longer breathe water. I am quadrant, rectangle, square, polygon. My moment becomes circle and then fractals out like pond ripples, concentric not spiral, the moments are this and this and this and this.

[126] The problem with the now-instant is the after. The after transfiguring into the radically new, as in dug out to its roots. I would like to plant seeds for the spring. I would like to become plant. Like The Vegetarian, I could stand upside down, spread my toes into leaves. But the snow weighs on me. I'm on the precipice of an after-now.

[128] I wake and I wake and I wake and every time I lay in bed for an hour because I am tired but my mind it lunges out ahead of me and I try to just breath as if I could conceive of breathing as my only task but the tension coils inside me like a good spring ready to give back its energy whenever you like whenever you are ready to release it because there is so much to push on like where will I live and how will I live and is it enough and am I enough and will the after of the now-instant go like this or like that and can I slough off expectation if I just scrub my skin hard enough or do I have to conceive of everything first does everything require a pregnancy.

[129] I am breech born baby backwards, tending to this head I can feel just below my ribs. At my touch he may shift around, little bird inside me, unsure how to fly. He won't turn head down, instead kicks his wings into my pelvis. He has time but time shakes around, slowly sinks, will eventually go dry. Here is my first test: what I have created slides away from my controlling mind. I conceive and then the conception grows. Seed into sprout into nature's first green and suddenly the sun takes over and the weather does its chaotic work and genes unfold into a great expanding mess of creation.

[130] Even if I stop writing the baby keeps growing. I try to mold him: sometimes I press on his head in hopes that a light touch will peel him from out of my pelvis and let him flip. This creation which I would like to flip upside down, which is really right way up, not yet ready for a smooth exit. My anxiety mounts because he will not turn, because my writing does not always come, because if I stop nothing will happen, I will stay still, my ideas will entomb themselves, and the baby will do whatever he wants and he needs no words or direction or touch at all.

[133] My body starts to rebel. My hips hurt when I sleep, I feel vaguely nauseated, I strain my groin, I hunger and then I don't, I wake up often in the night, I itch. My baby rebels too: he will not flip head down, will not let me labor him out like I had hoped. The anxiety of conception was, at first, a fear that nothing would ever come. Now it becomes the fear that what comes will not cling to my own hopes and dreams. What comes is wind and storm, tide and current. What comes on its own terms.

[142] Crease in the breast. The baby whose head sits just below the ribs. Wrong way. Token toughness. Look, this isn't it at all. Falling and shredding and keeping it all---where? In the instant-now that doesn't end. Keep time. Tick off weeks. Lay your head down with your snout facing forward. Get wet in the rain. Lose the tears; the headache is enough. Soon what is within you will be without. I mean, outside. Of you. It's terrifying to think we grow things inside us. That they will one day depart. My mum says it will feel quiet inside after. After, a hush.

[143] My dog turns and turns and turns. Yes, I abandoned a friend. I was at my limit. I am at my limit. My dog cannot get comfortable. I walk home and feel the depression lowering onto me. Good friend who I cannot abandon. I know all the tricks but I still feel weak. My dog scratches at the couch. He will burrow a hole eventually. Hole in my mind and the leaky ooze of death slides in. I know creation is joyous. Sorry, joyless. I know.

[146] My rib cage needs to expand. My lungs soften. I can't quite figure out where my stomach is anymore. When I bend over, everything creases. I need to stand up straighter, pull my head back. Create space. S\_\_\_ builds himself a new desk, quickly, and the wood grain doesn't match, and the screws show, but he built it fast and sturdy and heavy. I've become heavy too. Bulbous. The round object below my right rib, maybe four or five inches now in diameter, could either be his head or his butt, and I wonder all day about this. All day we make something new for ourselves.

[147] Funny fish within. Foot, head, butt, hand, lithe bubble of -- what? Imagine yourself a fish tank. I try to shine a light in but all I see is skin and veins. I dream of an x-ray machine so I can see his machinations. Communication only by touch. A bit like in the movie Arrival, when the aliens flitter in and out of an empty fog, this creature within me ripples my belly only when he deigns to surface. Backing away he becomes the nothing of stillness.

[149] I am being stretched. I fling myself against the wall of my own words. I crack open. I feel like a yolk. I simmer and then, shiver. I am trying to tell you something. My hands are planted. I strengthen my shoulders, my elbows, my wrists. Finally, my palms learn to shift my weight. Inside, I've become upside down. If it comes from within me, it must be of me. There must be a theme. I keep hoping that if I attend to his movements closely enough, I will learn something about him. That I can read his palms through my belly. But I am outside his world. Blind, deaf, and dumb to it.

[151] When I sit still, he comes alive, just as everyone told me. The little fish becomes bigger, and he writhes and turns, mystery within. I have created something uncontrollable. Your lyrics come out fast, and they hint at a feeling beyond touch. Or do they come to you slowly? The feeling is within you but hard to push out. This creature---a bird, a fish, a little dragon who hasn't yet learned of fire---already a puzzle box. I pull at the sides looking for where there might be motion. The lyrics are inside and you know how to pull them out, long thread of tangled thought. I write two things at once. The bird kicks of motion, and the need to turn feeling into language. It's useless because already the rolling across my stomach has turned to bubbles, to jabs, to the boops of a dog pushing his nose into objects to test their solidity. Here is the solidity: everything is changing.

[152] This cannot be one thing, this thing with a life of its own, beating its own heart, folding up into its own shape. Topology of the fetus, deformation of the self, continuity of creation. He will not stay still, but he also will not go head down. I said once I too could put my hands on the ground and perhaps lift my feet upwards into the leaves of a tree. I shouldn't have said it so loud.

[153] Think of the double pendulum, no, the triple pendulum, the chaotic spirals drawn through the air. I've become sensitive to starting conditions, the momentary stillness of the butterfly wing before the wind bucks up and you're not here anymore, you're somewhere else, you're drawing circles in the air, you're becoming the air, you're the atoms swept off the ocean, you're salt and water and minerals, and yes the ocean is warming up and yes she's rising to meet us and yes collective action is so hard we may not achieve it and yes this is a little life but there is a moment when you close your eyes and can just wait for the future to meet you on its own terms.

[157] The second anxiety is that it is not any good. The words string together but don't light up. The child comes out wrong and mean. You put the book down halfway. You forget about it. You never return; it ends up on a stack to be donated and lives its life in a second-hand bookstore until some tired poet picks it up to use as collaging material. The words become mince meat. The child never gets on track. I don't even want to describe it, though I've seen it, the way a person can fall apart and no one can help them put the pieces back. Is it your fault? Did the chaotic tide turn luck and genius away from you, send its shivers down someone else's spine? The first anxiety is to create at all. The second, a crash.

[158] The rush is that there is no rush. The wind skids to a stop at the front door and the dogs howl at their station. I am hurtled toward birth but so slowly I feel every jostle. The doctors are unconcerned, bored even, at my fear. The anxiety of conception is not the lack of control, I've been lying to you. It's the lack of choice. I run toward a future I cannot control and I cannot stop running, I've never been able to, I always return to it despite all the problems it causes me. I run with the wind so it doesn't feel so strong. I rush so that I think I am the one rushing. I believe the doctors because how terrifying to admit that no one is making informed choices. No one is making choices at all.

[159] Little dragon without a name. Little bony bird. Alien army. Jellyfish tentacle. Armadillo rolling across the sand. Do armadillos roll? Rolly polly, little bug. Skink with the lost tail flickering around on the other side of my belly. Little lamb with its bony head. Three-headed monster. Twelve-tailed fox. Kangaroo fighting to get out, pushing long legs into my sides.

[163] It is banal: to want to stop existing. The cloud lowers, and then the lightning comes, always in my wrists, a cold fire that licks up my forearms and down into my palms. A familiar pattern I try to forget and I'm not sure it should even be said. The words, the desire behind them, become heavy with magic. I want to keep them buried. Still, they come, and I share them only to drench this work in honesty. The anxiety of conception is a gate, and it glistens in this salty rain, and my job is to describe its curlicue woodwork and the trestles of vines and to stand solidly on my own two feet and stay still.

[164] I enter a cold as I finish a book on monsters. The monsters are artists---terrible men who rape and terrible women who abandon their children. The sickness lowers me. I spend days in bed and I feel bothered by my weakness amidst the geniuses who let their work subsume their lives. I will not be a monstrous mother, but perhaps I should consider it. Why won't I give up sleep for creation? Give up a career for greatness? My ambition wanes, then waxes. I want one beautiful sentence. I will spend a lifetime on it. I will read Nabokov in his mystery. Hemingway in his cruelty. Carver in his drunken, downward state. Still I need sleep. Still I shy from these words.

[166] After the shower, I look over my right shoulder for the faint outline of my scar, the speckled splotchy redness of its slow disappearance, and when I don't find it I wonder if that scar is even mine, or if I am remembering S\_\_\_’s bike accident, or the old bike accident of a friend. My body merges and then falls to pieces. Perhaps I am not myself, and even my body has become the accumulation of mere memory.

[167] Head down and it's true: he moves differently. For days I question the bulges under my right rib, rubbing raw the fleshy outcropping. Is this still a foot? Has he tricked me, swooped his head out of my pelvis at night, again pushing his crown toward my hand like an overeager dog? But no, this child, flipped and dipped and tripped into a new position by a midwife with large, strong hands seems, so far, so good, to stay in his new position, lowering down into that gap between my hips. One day a book may feel this way: settled and stable. But so far writing has remained liminal, not flesh and not ghost, unsure of what stasis could be.

[169] To flip the baby they tilt me back, head below my feet, my uterus sliding, softly, up towards my ribs. I was told to come with a full bladder, to help push the baby out of the pelvis. The midwife settles her hand on my lower abdomen, pressing in to firmly cradle this creature's butt, and then asks me how long it took me to get to the hospital, while her hand gets deeper and starts to push. I am being changed from the outside in. I am being sculpted. I become sand, firm with water, and the midwife chats away, asking about my mother, and where I grew up, and my body is being formed differently now, and like any transformation it starts to hurt, at first just the discomfort of being manipulated like clay, and then the turgid turn toward actual pain, and I know now this baby is out of my pelvis, his butt moved up toward my belly button, and the midwife is chatty and I try to know my breath, the molecular feeling of air entering the nostril, one side always more sharp and cased in than the other, because I am not, in fact, viscous and wet sand but stubborn flesh aching back against this woman's determined grip, and we are fighting over the landscape of my belly, and the child is in the middle, silent, not even a slight rise in heart rate, and suddenly as the air moving into my lungs creases under burning of my middle, she says: It's done. Your baby is head down.

[170] And how can this be? A grand change that felt so little like I expected?

[172] Etel Adnan (a beautiful name, with such symmetric vowels) writes in patches about the sea, a wave that lost its way, the need to look at the Pacific before you die, how the sea has no arms to uplift the sky. Reading Sea and Fog is like meditating, just feeling the breath go in and out, the words themselves releasing their meaning lightly into the air. When I look up to check if I've missed my bus stop, then down again, the words have rearranged, I haven't read any of them, they're gone, vapor-like and flighty. Nothing in particular makes me want to keep reading, except perhaps the desire to sit in her words and feel her breath eking out over the water. If anything the words enervate me, letting my consciousness dip into something below structure and semantics, and I don't know if I even like the feeling, even if the patches have moments of clarity about climate change or a loss of love. What was she trying to create? Did it worry her, that her words weigh so little they slick off the page like bubbles, opalescent shimmer before disappearing completely?

[177] Head down and the beast is calm, roiling around and throwing out his legs but never with malice or greed. Sometimes I sleep so well I wonder if labor is near, but there are no signs, and I nap during the day and I read at night about silence and quietude and the difference between the two. I am reminded of Terry Tempest Williams writings about and in Utah and the quiet of the desert and the time I convinced S\_\_\_ we could camp in Joshua Tree without thick sleeping bags and it is still cold here but I can tell that winter in lifting I can feel spring is near even if I cannot tell if birth is.

[178] I daydream about a job that gives me so much but would not give me writing. The anxiety of conception is its instability; we conceive before the world asks anything of us, and the world has asked so little of writers, we writers too eager to offer up our strange dreams. I want to sleep in the bed of creation, but I worry about my other dreams: computation, academia, health insurance. I feel blinded by my own station. I feel asleep at my own side.

[179] The trope is that it's threadbare to write about childbirth, our most ancient and common history. Maggie Nelson said that labor was strictly quiet and my mother agrees it is an internality. The bookstore has its whole section on essays, literary criticism, writers looking in and on themselves and other writers, writing about writing, myself failing here too, fractaling down into the words, my own words, and childbirth is that shoreline that proved the point with fractals: the closer you try to measure the length of the shore, the longer it gets. Perhaps this was Lispector's problem with the instant-now. The more you can pin down this instant, the larger it becomes, the less you are able to hold in your hand.
